in the case of this article from the
daily mail
the headline is so long that it reads
as a short article unto itself
jordan peterson was suicidal
hooked on benzodiazepines diagnosed as
schizophrenic
and taken to russia by his daughter
where doctors put him in an eight day
coma
as he promotes self-help book that
publishers tried
to can yeah
why don't you leave some of the story to
be told in the article itself after the
headline
folks um the crucial part of that
headline is quote diagnosed as
schizophrenic
close quote naturally controversy is now
swirling around this fact that multiple
newspapers have faceted onto the detail
that he was diagnosed as schizophrenic
and some people i think are just
confused
they think that this is a case of
defamation that newspapers have
inappropriately or falsely reported him
to have been diagnosed schizophrenia
no he was diagnosed as schizophrenic
so the newspapers are not defaming him
in any way if they report that
as a fact both peterson
and his daughter seem to regard this
diagnosis
as incorrect or false and they're
entitled to their opinion
right but that doesn't mean the
journalists
are lying if they report that he was
indeed
diagnosed with schizophrenia now what a
different world
we would be living in if jordan peterson
had used his position
of power and privilege to advocate
for people who had been misdiagnosed
with schizophrenia in the past
or even to challenge the medical
establishment
in general as to what it is we mean by
schizophrenia
anyway i would say in the year 2021
we are at the midway point of an arc
at the beginning of the story people
regarded schizophrenia uncritically
as a biologically real condition
just like malaria
and it is not you may be aware that the
last few decades
the concept of a psychopath has gone
through a similar
sort of story where people used to
consider a psychopath a biologically
real
innate condition some people were born
that way some weren't
and then just with increasing skepticism
and sophistication
people have come to regard psychopath as
nothing more than a
cultural concept it's not a medical
concept it's not a
biologically real concept in as much as
it's a diagnosis it's really just saying
your behavior conforms to this
stereotype
and you know the thing about stereotypes
they're prejudicial i'm sure you will
have noticed
that i have on screen here a formal
peer-reviewed article
discrimination and the incidence of
psychotic disorders among
ethnic minorities in the netherlands yes
isn't that interesting highlighted in
green
the incidence of schizophrenia is
extremely high
for several ethnic minority groups in
western europe why
why do you think that is well if you
think this is a biologically real
disease if you even think it's genetic
you would view this evidence in one way
if you regard this as nothing more than
a cultural convention
you would regard it another you might
think that hey maybe
just maybe some of these medical
professionals
are less sympathetic towards
ethnic minorities and diagnose their
misery
or their extreme and erratic behavior as
schizophrenia
whereas if the same person had come in
with the same conditions but maybe had
white skin
or maybe spoke the language without a
foreign accent
or maybe there weren't other cultural
barriers to understanding what they were
going through
it might not just be linguistic or
racial prejudice but just you know you
have
you have a refugee from afghanistan who
shows up in your office and he's
behaving in a very erratic way
and maybe the medical professional can't
sympathize can't relate to what's
going on with him due to cultural
barriers also so when we start to regard
schizophrenia more in this way then
these types of reports
quote ethnic density of neighborhoods
and incidents of psychotic disorders
among
immigrants in green highlighted again
some studies suggest that
ethnic density may uh influence the
incidence of schizophrenia
oh you don't say you don't say now you
in the audience
can do your own reading and draw your
own conclusions do you think
we're in the middle of a story arc where
schizophrenia was initially believed to
be a
medically real biologically verifiable
illness and that more and more
scientific evidence
is just going to continue to prove that
continue to pin it down in the same way
that we've researched cancer
we have an ever more precise
understanding of different types of
cancer and different symptoms
do you think that's do you think that's
what's happening let's get afraid now or
do you think schizophrenia is going to
start to transform
as we examine it under the microscope
and be revealed to be nothing more than
a kind
of cultural concept these are the
criteria
used to diagnose schizophrenia
in the united states in canada generally
in the
western english-speaking world from a
very famous book called the
dsm you must have two
or more of the following features
of your behavior shall we say
one delusions two hallucinations
three disorganized speech four
grossly disorganized or catatonic
behavior
and then five negative symptoms which
has been updated in the dsm-5 to read
diminished emotional expression etc
at least one of these under the dsm-5
must be one two or three
so if dr jordan peterson
was diagnosed as schizophrenic
this would be the basis for that
diagnosis a medical professional
with training and education very similar
to what dr jordan pearson himself has
he's a specialist in the same field
interviewed him examined him and came to
the conclusion
that he was experiencing some
combination of
delusions hallucinations etc and as you
see
it must include at least one
of numbers one two and three right and
at least two
or more of the numbered items
on this list now i am not saying this
with a lack of sympathy for dr
peterson or anyone who's been diagnosed
with schizophrenia you could be going
through a very difficult time in your
life for a number of reasons
and get this diagnosis and if you're
gullible enough or weak enough you could
be put on mind altering drugs
that ruin the rest of your life you
could be rendered unemployable you could
start receiving
uh government benefit checks it can
change your life
forever and the truth is in many cases
not all
in many it could just be that you are
going through a period of crisis that
you could come out of at the other end
being again a highly effective person
maybe maybe i'll tell you one thing item
e in the formal diagnosis
for schizophrenia the disturbance is not
attributable to the physiological
effects of a substance
e.g a drug of abuse a medication
or another medical condition so the
claim
that dr jordan peterson's erratic
behavior was caused by medications
he was taking is seriously challenged by
the fact that
in these conditions he was diagnosed not
with academia
that's his preferred diagnosis that's
what he wants you to think he had none
of us have seen videotape of him having
the symptoms
of academia i have on this channel in
the past presented you with videotape
of other people with that condition
genuinely have the condition of what it
looks like it's a horrifying
horrifying condition very serious
sentence we don't know
if he had what we know is a medical
professional
with exactly this kind of training
examined him
and came to the conclusion that this
disturbance whatever his erratic
behavior was
was not attributable to drugs
that instead dr jordan peterson
is schizophrenic
[Music]
maybe we can we can practice
i need yes